# Community And Ecosystem

## Identifying Archetypes In Your Community

One of the most important skills for agencies exploring open source is
understanding existing ecosystems and their project's place within
them.  In order to plan a project that builds on or collarborates with
other open source efforts, agencies must know their own projects and
also what to expect from other community participants.  Not all open
source efforts act alike.

Experienced open source practitioners build nuanced open source
strategies by pattern-matching against other open source projects.
They use those patterns to understand their own projects and also the
other open source efforts around them.  Practitioners with a lot of
experience have seen many different types of projects succeed and fail
in all kinds of situations.  Less experienced practitioners pattern
match against a smaller set, which is to say they might have only one
or a small handful of open source approaches and find it difficult to
perform nuanced analysis.

Mozilla identified this experience gap as a general problem in open
source.  They developed a set of archetypes to give practitioners more
patterns to match against.  These archetypes are designed to lead
people away from generic open source thinking and toward considering
in more detail the behaviors and dynamics your open source investment
seeks to create.  Instead, the hope is that projects get specific
about what they want from open source and then look for patterns and
practices in successful open source projects that operate in similar
contexts.

Mozilla and some community partners drew up a field guide to common
project types we find when we study the open source landscape.  They
listed these archetypes and some notes about them in [Open Source
Archetypes: A Framework For Purposeful Open
Source](https://opentechstrategies.com/files/pub/MZ+OTS_OS_Archetypes_report_ext_scr.pdf)
and shared their analysis with the community.  They recommend study of
those archetypes because they are a route to understanding our own
projects as well as the strategies of competitors and collaborators.
In some projects, one sees multiple archetypes at work or even
different sets of participants pushing the project toward separate
archetypal practices.  Each place archetype tends toward typical
strategies, and categorizing projects by archetype can help in
predicting behavior.  Similarly, where the strategies deviate, we can
usually find deviation from the archetype too.

A complete discussion of each archetype is available in Mozilla's
report; below are just their names, from which one might draw an idea
of the project pattern each one represents:

 * [Wide Open](https://opentechstrategies.com/files/presentations/2018-finos/finos-presentation.html\#(3))
 * [Trusted Vendor](https://opentechstrategies.com/files/presentations/2018-finos/finos-presentation.html\#(11))
 * [Controlled Ecosystem](https://opentechstrategies.com/files/presentations/2018-finos/finos-presentation.html\#(7))
 * [Multi-Vendor Infrastructure](https://opentechstrategies.com/files/presentations/2018-finos/finos-presentation.html\#(5))
 * [Upstream Dependency](https://opentechstrategies.com/files/presentations/2018-finos/finos-presentation.html\#(6))
 * [Rocket Ship to Mars](https://opentechstrategies.com/files/presentations/2018-finos/finos-presentation.html\#(8))
 * [Specialty Library](https://opentechstrategies.com/files/presentations/2018-finos/finos-presentation.html\#(9))
 * [Mass Market](https://opentechstrategies.com/files/presentations/2018-finos/finos-presentation.html\#(10))
 * [B2B Open Source](https://opentechstrategies.com/files/presentations/2018-finos/finos-presentation.html\#(4))
 * [Bathwater](https://opentechstrategies.com/files/presentations/2018-finos/finos-presentation.html\#(12))


The most common archetype we observe in the wild is the "Wide Open"
project.  This is normally what people think of when they imagine an
open source project.  Wide Open projects take all comers and try to
gather as much dev momentum as they can.  They skew toward shared
governance models and cultivate a welcoming, inclusive air.  This
approach is popular for a reason--- it's a pretty good default
starting point for a lot of projects, especially government-led open
source.

But not all projects fit that mold.  Sometimes you want to build an
open source ecosystem and absolutely must retain a strong, controlling
position to achieve the policy goals that drive your open source work.
In industry, we see that, for example, with Google's Android work.
There, one company makes the majority of the investment, and benefits
by steering the majority of the mobile market to its products,
services, and advertising network.

In Android's case, the additive value of individual additional
contributors to the ecosystem is fairly low.  It's not worth giving up
control to gain those contributions.  A Wide Open approach doesn't fit
Google's strategic need.  Instead, one can classify that project as
B2B Open Source, which is a much less inviting model.

Archetypes help us identify that Android is not like a stereotypical
open source project.  They allow us to see its actual behavior.  That
reveals something about Android's strategy and helps us form credible
expectations about how the project will behave in the future.  It
would be disastrous, for example, to build a product strategy that
depends on being able to have any influence on Android's road map or
feature set.  Anybody who misidentifies Google's strategy on that
point (and there have been a few) is defeated before they write a
single line of code.

Although government agencies can expect to find the full range of
archetypes among the projects it encounters, its own projects will
tend to fall into just a few categories.  Most government projects
lean toward "Wide Open" dynamics.  Less often one finds "Controlled
Ecosystem," "Multi-Vendor Infrastructure," and "Trusted Vendor"
archetypes.  All of these are candidates for projects lead by or
originating in government agencies, depending on strategic and policy
needs.

There are other cases where archetypes help us understand the open
source world around us.  In each case, the archetypes are a rough lens
that leads us to clarify our view of a products position.  The
archetypes, though, are just a starting point.  They are a shared
vocabulary for a conversation that should eventually move beyond
archetypal thinking.  After all, a project's success will come in
details much finer than a few archetypes could possibly capture.

It is always important to remember that ultimately each archetype is a
simplification.  Every successful project grows because it is
well-fitted to the particular needs of its contributors and users.  If
you view the archetypes as a set of slightly-more-specific generic
game plans, you lose most of their value.  They are a starting point
for consideration.  As a project grows and adapts to its niche, its
strategy and planning can and should move to a uniquely detailed view
of its needs.  Archetypes are a useful start to analysis, but the
conversation should never end there.


[There is more to say here of course, but this section is getting
long, so let's leave off for the moment and not go deeper than we
need.]
